The dance macabra or dance of death is a
late medieval motif that illustrates the
universality of death. The constant
famines, wars, and especially the black
death in Europe showed how fragile and
fleeting life truly was. Death was not a
distant fate, but a sudden, everpresent
companion. This grim reality intensified
the religious desire for repentance and
salvation. But it also stirred a
desperate craving for amusement and
indulgence while life lasted. A final
dance before the inevitable end. A
living skeleton, the personification of
death, leads people from all walks of
life, pope, king, clergy, peasant,
merchant, old and young alike, in one
great chain danced towards the grave.
Death is the great equalizer for no one
can escape its grasp. It strips away all
power, wealth, and status. This image
serves as a momento mori which means
remember that you must die. It is a
meditation on mortality reminding us of
the fragility of life and the vanity of
earthly pursuits. Shakespeare writes,
"For within the hollow crown that rounds
the mortal temples of a king, keeps
death his watch, and there the antic,
the court fool, sits, scuffing at his
state, and grinning at his pump,
allowing him a little time to
monarchize, be feared, and kill with
looks. And then at last comes death and
with a little pin balls through his
castle wall and farewell king.
Death is compared to the court fool.
There seems to be a kind of gest in
death. Monks used to keep skulls in
their cells to remind them of mortality.
Though the skull is commonly seen as
grim, it can also appear to be grinning.
It is all that remains of a human being,
a single bone. And it laughs.
Nowadays, many consider this morbid
because we prefer to deny the reality of
death. But as a natural part of human
existence, death should not be feared.
Philosophy, as Plato writes in the Fido,
is a preparation for death. The foolish
believe they will never die. The wise
live as though they die a little each
day. The premeditation of death is the
premeditation of liberty. He who has
learned to die has unlearned to serve.
In Somerset Mom's short story,
Appointment in Samara, a retelling of an
ancient tale, a servant meets the
blackroed crone, death. The servant sees
her make what appears to be a
threatening gesture. Terrified, he
borrows his master's horse and flee to
Samara. That afternoon, the master
confronts the crone in the marketplace
and asks, "Why did you make a
threatening gesture to my servant this
morning?" Death replies, "That was not a
threatening gesture. It was only a start
of surprise. I was astonished to see
your servant in Baghdad, for I had an
appointment with him tonight in Samara."
By wasting precious time and energy
trying to avoid death, one ultimately
fails to truly live. In the end, it is
oneself who betrays life. Until we learn
to entrust ourselves to death, we cannot
fully entrust ourselves to life.
While death may appear at times
terrifying and at other times playful,
those he summons almost always tremble
with fear. All except one, the fool. He
joins the dance with a smile, laughing
at the absurdity of it all. To him, the
world is a theater and all men and women
merely actors, each wearing different
social masks to play their roles in
society. He sees that people live only
to make money and that the highest goal
is to land a respectable job. That
people buy things they don't need with
money they don't have, to impress people
they don't like. That what matters are
what others think of one and how well
one fulfills social expectations. That
love is reduced to marrying someone
financially secure. That friendship is
only useful when money is needed. That
wisdom is just believing what most
people say. That passion means speaking
with great energy but saying nothing of
real value. That kindness is little more
than saying something polite. And that
piety means attending church every
Sunday without any true heartfelt
belief. Seeing all this, how shallow,
hollow, and absurd it truly is, the fool
cannot help but to laugh. In this
context, Kugore writes, "When I became
older, when I opened my eyes and saw
reality, I started to laugh and haven't
stopped since."
The fool laughs at how seriously we take
our lives, for in the end, no one gets
out alive. Laughter and tragedy are
often intertwined. Ner writes, "Perhaps
I know best why man is the only animal
that laughs. He alone suffers so
excruciatingly that he was compelled to
invent laughter. The unhappiest and most
melancholy animal is, as might have been
expected, the most cheerful."
Till Oilen Spiegel is a popular 14th
century trickster figure in German
folklore. In one story, he laughed and
sang happily while laboring uphill. But
when going downhill, where it was
pleasant and easy, he wept and grew
gloomy. When asked why, he replied,
"When I go uphill, I think of going
downhill. And when I go downhill, I
think of going uphill." In other words,
he found joy when walking uphill in
anticipation of the coming descent.
Laughter becomes more than a simple
expression of happiness. It is a way to
cope with and even transcend suffering.
A cheerful heart is good medicine and
lightens the weight of our burdens. We
might shed tears not only from grief but
also from overwhelming happiness.
Laughter and tears are not always
straightforward signals of joy and
sadness. In fact, extreme emotions can
flip our usual responses. As William
Blake writes, "Excess of sorrow laughs.
Excess of joy weeps."
Our modern age dominated by relentless
productivity and constant busyiness is
indeed a tragic comic reality. We
convince ourselves that our daily
pursuits of money, prestige, and status
are serious and meaningful. Yet this
frantic chase is often little more than
a distraction from the true great work,
the journey of knowing oneself. Many of
us fill our days with endless activity
to mask our anxiety. This busyiness
becomes a way of running away from
ourselves. By replacing deep emotional
experiences with constant chatter, work
or ceaseless activity, we tend to grow
emptier and lonelier. Kigo writes, "Of
all ridiculous things in the world, what
strikes me as the most ridiculous of all
is being busy in the world. To be a man
quick to his meals and quick to his
work. So when at the crucial moment I
see a fly settle on such a businessman's
nose, or he be spattered by a carriage
which passes him by in even greater
haste, or the drawbridge is raised, or a
tile falls from the roof and strikes him
dead. I laugh from the bottom of my
heart. And who could help laughing? For
what do they achieve, these busy
butchers? Are they not like the
housewife who, in confusion at the fire
in her house, saved the fire tongues?
What else do they salvage from the great
fire of life?
A random event like a falling roof tile
can end everything, showing that all our
rushing was for nothing. People caught
in this frenzy fail to build anything
meaningful or of lasting value. Like the
panicked housewife who saved a small
metal tool while her home burned down.
They cling to the trivial and lose the
essential. In the end, they are left
with nothing of true value.
It is easy to become lost in the
routines of daily life, striving to
please others and perform the roles
expected of us. Only when we face death
do our social masks shatter, revealing
who we truly are for perhaps the first
time. But often there's nothing but a
void. By then it is too late to embark
on the journey of self-discovery. For
the grim reaper has come to claim us. In
her book, The Top Five Regrets of the
Dying, Bronny Wear writes that the most
common regret expressed by those nearing
death is, "I wish I'd had the courage to
live a life true to myself, not the life
others expected of me." As people
approach the end of their lives, they
often speak not of deep regret over what
they did, but of what they failed to do,
of dreams left unpursued and potential
unrealized.
Psychologically, this can be understood
as an expression of the unlived life. It
reflects a life overly identified with a
persona, the mask one wears to meet
collective expectations at the expense
of the self, the totality of who one
truly is. Kyung writes, "One could say
with a little exaggeration that the
persona is that which in reality one is
not, but which oneself as well as others
think one is.
When we ask the question, who are you?
People tend to respond in two distinct
ways. One replies by naming his name,
family background, profession or
hobbies, thus identifying himself
through his social roles. The other
falls silent, slightly unsettled by the
realization of just how profound the
question really is. As the end of life
approaches, the illusion of outer
success fades. What remains is the clear
realization of a missed chance to know
oneself. If you stayed true to yourself,
you remain at peace. If not, deep regret
sets in. We must cultivate an authentic
relationship with our own mortality.
Rather than seeing death as something
distant, we should recognize it as an
essential part of our being, always
present, shaping our very existence. To
deny death, to treat it as something
that happens only to others leads to
inauthenticity, conformity and
distraction. But if we face our
mortality, we can focus on what truly
matters. Change is difficult because we
are creatures of habit. Even changes we
have consciously planned in daily life
are often resisted. Though we may
understand that birth and death are two
sides of the same coin, the real
challenge lies in accepting our personal
mortality. To accept death like birth as
part of life is to become truly alive.
Before exploring the relationship
between death and the fool, let us first
look at the different types of fools.
While the archetype of the fool, like
any archetype, is in itself
unrepresentable, we come to know its
patterns and behaviors through its
various archetypal images. Buffoon, cold
jester, trickster, clown, joker, wise
fool, natural fool, and holy fool.
We usually use the word fool as an
insult to refer to a simpleton or stupid
person. However, one should not curse
the fool, but rather learn to live by
his rule. Sometimes we only play the
fool just to make others laugh. We may
view the buffoon as the most outwardly
ridiculous of the fool figures. He
offers no insight, but performs
slapstick comedy, pies in the face,
slipping on banana peels, and the like.
He dances absurdly, pulls silly faces,
tickles or plays peekaboo. This is humor
without reflection. Even infants laugh
at it, suggesting it is among the most
primal forms of comedy. The playful art
of buffoonery is found across all
cultures.
The greatest fools, however, are often
cleverer than those who laugh at them.
These professional or licensed fools,
such as the court jester, stand with one
foot in entertainment and the other in
dangerous truth. Because he was
considered a fool, the jester was
allowed to speak truths that no one else
dared voice to the king. To achieve
this, he used humor, satire, riddles,
and songs to make harsh realities
palatable, skillfully disguising them
with wit. Since his words were deemed
foolish, he was safe. But often these
were the most intelligent or honest
words spoken at the royal court. He was
granted legal license by the king to act
as a fool, giving him a special
protected status. To make this privilege
known, the court jester imitated the
king's crown and scepter with a cabin
bells and a full scepter. This freedom
allowed him to operate outside the usual
rules of hierarchy. Wrapped in
performance, he could mock nobility,
challenge the king, and expose
hypocrisy, effectively reversing the
roles in society. The jester is a liinal
entity, both an insider and an outsider.
As the cultural anthropologist Victor
Turner states, liinal entities are
neither here nor there. They are pixed
and between the positions assigned and
arrayed by law, custom, convention, and
ceremonial.
The justice neither a servant nor fully
a noble. He is both and neither. This
paradoxical nature aligns him closely
with the trickster archetype. While not
exactly the same, they belong to the
same species.
The Trixton social outsider Oilen
Spiegel represents the cunning peasant
who outsmarts towns folk and tradesmen.
His name means owl mirror. While owls
often symbolize wisdom, in medieval
Europe, they were seen as bad omens. His
wisdom lies in holding up a mirror to
society, exposing hypocrisy by
reflecting people's foolishness and
forcing them willy-nilly to confront
their shadow, the unknown or neglected
parts of themselves. The best way to see
your shadow is when someone else
reflects it back to you. The trickster
is a collective shadow figure, a
summation of all the inferior traits of
character in individuals.
Another professional fool is the clown
whose origin was influenced by 16th
century Italian comedia dearte Harley
Quinn. A clever servant and trickster
figure takes his name from a demon in
French folklore associated with a wild
hunt. He is contrasted with Po, the
melancholic, sensitive figure who became
the original white-faced sad clown
archetype.
The colorful circus clown emerged in
18th century England. Known for physical
comedy and acrobatics, clowns often
blend humor and tragedy, highlighting
the paradox of the human condition. Like
Kagor's clown, who warns the audience
that a fire has broken out backstage,
but is mistaken for a joke and mad with
applause. So, the world ends amid the
laughter of those who confuse tragedy
with comedy. The exaggerated smile of
the clown masks deep inner pain. This is
known as the sad clown paradox. Those
who make others laugh often struggle
with sadness, depression, or trauma.
Humor becomes a defense mechanism,
concealing emotional wounds. This
tension is reflected in the clown's dual
image, at times endearing, at others
terrifying, as seen in the rise of the
evil clown in horror and literature.
There are also sacred clowns such as the
Hayoka of the Sue people of North
America who are always doing the
opposite of those around them. Saying
goodbye when greeting someone, laughing
in moments of sorrow, or riding a horse
backwards. These contrarian behaviors
are meant to challenge social norms,
reflecting the community's shadow side.
The hayok are both feared and respected
for their role is sacred. They are
similar to shamans or medicine men. Only
those who had a dream or vision of the
thunder beings can become hayoka,
granting them great power but also great
responsibility. For if they neglect
their duties, they risk being struck
down by the thunder beings.
A joker is someone who tells jokes or
amuses others. But the joker is more
than a comic figure. Introduced into
playing cards in the United States
during the mid 19th century. He serves
as a wild card able to become any card
in the deck. He exists outside of any
fixed social role capable of disrupting
the natural order of the game. Much like
the court jester who could invert
hierarchies, mark the powerful and
challenge the king. The Joker pops up
unexpectedly here and there, always
elusive, as if he was saying, "Now you
see me, now you don't." He's always
making us wonder, "Where is the Joker?"
The Joker lives in a liinal realm
between the magical and the physical,
being both playful and dangerous. Over
time, the Joker evolved into the villain
archetype, embodying humor and chaotic
fun, albeit in a maniacal way. He is
tricksterish and has the wit of the cold
jester. His key trait is hyper sanity, a
heightened awareness of reality that is
nevertheless perceived as madness. The
joke exists to solve what he deems a
widespread social problem, the lack of
awareness of the grand joke of life, and
he thereby turns reality upside down and
challenges the conventional notions of
good and evil.
The great secret of the fool is that
he's no fool at all. For he sees the
truth that no one else dares to face and
thereby becomes wise. This paradox is
seen in the figure of the wise fool.
Socrates, for example, claimed that his
wisdom arose from the awareness of his
own ignorance. The wise fool hides
wisdom behind a facade of madness. Such
a person identified as a fool by others
ultimately proves to be the true bearer
of wisdom. Foolishness is the necessary
compensation for wisdom. There is no
true wisdom without folly. Shakespeare's
professional fool Fester reflects on
this role when he says to himself, "Come
on, wit, give me something good to say
now. Those people who think they are
witty often prove to be fools. And I'm
sure that I'm not witty, so I might pass
for a wise man. Better a witty fool than
a foolish wit.
The fool figure seems to combine
madness, wisdom, and folly. In each thus
spoke Zarahustra. Zarahustra visits a
crowded marketplace where a tightroppe
walker is about to perform. Addressing
the crowd, he proclaims, "Man is a rope
tied between beast and uber mench, a
rope over an abyss." But the people fail
to understand him and think he's mad.
Meanwhile, the tightroppe walker begins
his work. At the midpoint, a buffoon
appears, teasing and chasing him. The
buffoon then leaps over the man, causing
him to lose his balance and fall to his
death. Just as Zarathustra, nature's
inner wise old man, appears as an
unannounced attraction, so does the
buffoon, the tightroppe walker moves
between life and death, wisdom and
folly, uber mench and animal. But in the
end, foolishness and death win, because
there's no harmony between the
opposites. This imbalance is reflected
in the proclamation of the man god,
which causes ego inflation that leads to
a fall. It aligns with the natural law
of enantromia where a one-sided attitude
in consciousness eventually triggers its
unconscious opposite to restore psychic
balance.
Those with physical deformities were
often not regarded as cursed but rather
as touched by God, a belief that can be
traced back to ancient Egypt where
dwarves were revered as bearers of
divine gifts. Owing to this sacred
status, individuals with physical
anomalies were often chosen to be
professional fools in royal houses.
Court dwarves, for instance, made the
king appear much larger and hence more
powerful. Their appearance provoked both
amusement and awe, evoking mythological
beings such as the dwarves of Germanic
folklore, earth dwelling spirits and
master blacksmiths, as well as elves,
cobbalts, gnomes, and leprechauns from
across European traditions. It was also
thought that those with physical
deformities were also mentally
deficient, which was often not the case.
This confusion led to their association
with a natural fool, a person who is
naive, childlike or mentally impaired.
The word fool derives from the Latin fus
meaning bellows or windback. The idea is
that a fool is an empty-headed person
whose words carry little weight like
air. Hence the association with terms
like airhead, halfwit, or blockhead. But
just as bells feed a fire with oxygen to
keep it alive and burning, the fool has
a way of igniting something in us. If
there isn't some fire in our life, we
feel absolutely empty. It is what gives
us tumors, the inner fire that drives us
to do what is right. Only such fire can
free us from our masa kung fusa, the
tangled inner chaos that keeps us
anxious, paralyzed, and oblivious of our
inner conflicts. This darkness must be
burned in order for new life to emerge.
For out of the darkest depths arises the
brightest light. Who in this mortal life
would see the light that is beyond all
light beholds best by fairing forth into
the darkness of the night.
The phoenix is reborn through fire. From
the harshest reality, from senseless
situations, from the deepest pain,
resurrection is born. We know that life
always finds a way through every
situation. Although it is hard to
recognize the light, it can come when
everything is dark. To rise again is to
not let hope fade. The natural fool
typically follows his instincts rather
than social norms or rules. What makes
him unique is that he is unconscious of
his folly. He does not pretend to be
foolish, but is perceived as such by
society, often because of his
unconventional behavior or failure to
conform to social expectations. Since
he's considered too simple to lie, he
often speaks uncomfortable or dangerous
truths that many dare not utter. The
professional fool imports the natural
fool's behavior into his performance.
Fairy tales often portray the natural
fool as someone dismissed as a good for
nothing, laughed at, and ridiculed. Yet,
he's the one who, against all odds,
marries the princess and inherits the
kingdom. He has complete faith in the
process of life and throws himself
wholeheartedly into everything he
encounters. In doing so, he redeems not
only himself, but all those he meets.
The fool dares to look where no one else
will. Rushing in where angels fear to
tread, he follows the alchemical maxim,
in filth it will be found. For it is in
the most neglected places that the
philosopher stone lies hidden. What you
need most is found where you least want
to look. In the German fairy tale, the
story of the youth who went forth to
learn what fear was. The archetypal fool
appears as a young man who cannot feel
fear. Determined to understand what it
means to shudder, he sets out on a
journey. He spends three nights in a
haunted castle, facing ghosts, evil
spirits, and supernatural challenges.
Yet, he remains unfaced. He finds a
treasure, redeems the castle, and
marries the princess. "That is all very
well," says the fool, "but I still do
not know how to shutter." In the end,
his wife, tired of his complaining,
pours a bucket of cold water and fish
over him. The fish wrigle on his body,
and at last he shudders.
The purity and honesty of the natural
fool, shows something holy about him.
This leads us to another type, the holy
fool. Well portrayed in dsttoyki's
novel, The Idiot. The protagonist,
Prince Mushkin, returns to Russia after
spending time in a sanatorium, receiving
treatment for epilepsy and idiocy, a
historical medical term for neurological
disorders. His honesty, innocence, and
openheartedness lead many to mistake him
for a fool, sharply contrasting with a
corrupt, egocentric, and materialistic
society around him. Yet when people
start to talk to him, they realize that
he possesses deep wisdom and represents
the Christian ideal of love. In Eastern
Orthodox Christianity, the Ura Diva are
figures of divine madness. They
represent what St. Paul called fools for
Christ, willingly enduring humiliation,
radical poverty, suffering, and even
death in order to follow the path of
truth and love regardless of what the
others say. Rejecting worldly
possessions in favor of a spiritual and
aesthetic life, the holy fool becomes
unstoppable and thus profoundly
threatening to the powers and
authorities of this world. The holy fool
dies to this world and gives birth to
divine truth. The holy fool, natural
fool, and wise fool seem to be the
closest expressions of the original
pattern and behavior of the archetype.
The fool as precursor to salvation,
transformation, and individuation. The
soul's journey towards wholeness in
which the ego aligns itself with the
self. Jung writes, "There is a mystical
fool in me that proved to be stronger
than all my science."
Numerous studies, anecdotal accounts,
and works such as Rick Grassman's DMT,
The Spirit Molecule, have documented
consistent encounters with entities
during DMT experiences. Among these are
beings that appear as clowns, jesters,
imps, or elves. Often described as
childish, mischievous, toylike,
mechanical, or cartoonish. Terrence
McKenna famously described them as
self-transforming machine elves. They
embody a combination of archetypes such
as the trickster, the fool, and the
eternal child. The entities often
perceived as more real than real, and
one frequently receives messages or
insights from them. These altered states
of consciousness may induce ego death
where the sense of eye dissolves and one
merges with a larger whole allowing
contact with the archetypes of the
collective unconscious. This experience
can either lead to enlightenment or to
bad trips. There's no shortcut to
self-realization.
The fool is part of us, part of the
unconscious. When we ignore him, we
neglect something essential in
ourselves. The purpose of the fool's
existence seems to be tied to the
psychological well-being of a culture.
Foolish behavior in all its forms across
the world is often marked by shocking or
astonishing antics. Through this, the
fool draws attention to what has been
forgotten or cast aside. By exposing
what society represses, he helps restore
our one-sidedness and moves us towards
psychic wholeness. In this way, the fool
appears as an organic response to the
psychological needs of the community. On
a more earthy level, perhaps it is
simply necessary to poke fun at
ourselves and our established social
structures. Mankind has often become
overly absorbed in the lofty pursuits of
intellect, power, and status while
neglecting the humble daily earthy side
of life. DSTski writes in notes from
underground to be too conscious is an
illness, a real thoroughgoing illness.
This excessive introspection paralyzes
action and breathes self-loathing.
When we are too detached from reality,
the fool comes to our rescue, grounding
us again. The word human comes from the
Latin humus, which means earth. To be
human is to be humble and down to earth.
Within this lies a rich source of
nourishment that heals us. This
forgotten element must be restored. The
fool does not ponder about the meaning
or purpose of life. He simply lives it.
Doniote and sona are the classic duo of
ego and shadow in western literature.
One is lofty stuck in the world of
imagination which he mistakes for
reality. The other is earthy and grounds
him. The two are opposites yet they need
each other for together they become
whole.
The dance of death was originally shown
as a chain of people from all walks of
life dancing with death. But in the 16th
century the artist Hans Holine the
younger reimagined it as death visiting
each person individually king peasant
and everyone in between dragging them
away in a dance accompanied by music.
This came to define the whole genre,
inspiring many later artists to create
their own versions. Here, the fool holds
a special place among death's victims.
Death takes up the fool's own
instrument, the bagpipe, a wind-filled
instrument. There's something in the
fool that Death appears to admire,
something he seeks to imitate. Death too
likes to play tricks. It has not always
come as grim and serious, but often
laughing and dancing, mimicking the
fool. The fool dances with death while
holding a deflated windbag as if about
to strike him with it. His finger
pressed to his lips hints at mischief or
empty-mindedness. It is as though he
mocks death, challenging fate. In
another version of Holine's dance of
death, death not only leads the dance,
but also wears the fool's costume,
complete with cabin bells. Death himself
becomes the fool. The fool appears half
reluctant, half entranced. The
relationship of death and the fool is
ambiguous and paradoxical based both
upon their similarities and their
opposition. At times, death plays the
fool and sometimes ceizes him. They are
alternatively allies and enemies. Both
laugh at human pretensions and the
illusion of control over life, bringing
down the proud and powerful whenever
possible. Just as the fool often outwits
wiser men, death ultimately claims all
living beings. Death's unsettling grin
mirrors the fool's vacant smile or
rocker's laughter. Together, they embody
two universal conditions that many
prefer to ignore, mortality and folly.
As truth tellers, they show the hard
truths hiding beneath everyday life. In
the first of two images by the 16th
century painter Zebel Beham, the fool
stands beside a lady, symbolizing
attachment to worldly beauty. In the
second image, the fool is replaced by
death. The inscription above reads,
"Death abolishes all beauty in man."
This contrast shows that death and folly
are intertwined, perhaps even
indistinguishable.
The fool's joy in life dares to
challenge death's dominion. Though death
always triumphs, it is never without a
fierce struggle to overcome one of his
most stubborn victims. For the fool
embodies life, not death. He laughs at
death, and death laughs back, but the
fool still dances along the track.
The fool dancing with death represents
the union of opposites, life and death,
wisdom and folly, a characteristic of
the self. Like music, prayer and
meditation, a dance has no destination.
It does not aim at a goal in time. It is
done purely for its own sake. In the art
of dancing, you are dancing to dance.
This is genuine play, something done
just for the joy of it and not for some
ulterior motive. We need not constantly
kill time or feel we have wasted time,
treating it as an enemy in our
insatiable striving for progress. Until
we acknowledge this restlessness, the
root of our anxiety, we will never learn
what it means to be alive, to really
live, to stop doing, and just be. The
truth is that the present moment is the
only reality. We should focus on being
with existence and doing our duty day by
day. For we suffer more in imagination
than in reality. The fool lives in the
eternal now. For the past has passed and
the future is yet to come. Rather than
wishing things were different, he
accepts them as they are. In this way,
life will flow well. As Christ says,
therefore do not worry about tomorrow
for tomorrow will worry about itself.
Each day has enough trouble of its own.
In the image of Nataraja, Shiva as the
cosmic dancer performs the dance of
bliss. Here once again we encounter the
paradox of the union of opposites. The
dance is full of dynamic movement and
his hair flows wildly. Yet his face
remains serene and calm capturing
stillness in motion order within chaos.
In one hand he holds a drum by whose
spiritual sounds the universe is
created. In another he holds fire which
destroys everything. A third hand makes
the fear not pose offering protection
while the fourth hand signifies
concealment and points towards his
raised foot symbolizing the path to
moxia or liberation from samsara the
cycle of birth and rebirth. His other
foot crushes the demon of Avita, not
seeing all ignorance. A manifestation of
Maya, the magical veil of illusion that
casts a spell over the world, making the
transient world appear ultimately real.
The word illusion derives from the Latin
lud, meaning to play. The world is like
a play in which all things dance between
appearance and truth, an eternal game of
hideand seek.
Like someone who thinks a play on stage
is real, we too are caught in Maya when
we see the physical world as ultimate
reality. Forgetting the deeper spiritual
truth that we are souls having human
experiences. Awakening means seeing
through the play realizing that the
actor is God in disguise and choosing to
play along consciously.
The fool lives in Leela, a Sanskrit word
meaning divine play. In Hinduism,
Brahman is the ultimate infinite and
unchanging reality underlying all
existence beyond form and comprehension.
Since God is complete and lacks nothing,
there's no purpose or necessity for
creation. Instead, the universe arises
spontaneously out of joy and freedom.
The world becomes the stage on which
this divine play unfolds with life's ups
and downs woven into the cosmic drama.
This spontaneous joyful playfulness is
embodied in Krishna as a divine child
who's engaged in charming and
mischievous acts enchanting everyone
with his flute and performing miracles.
His actions have no fixed goals or
purposes. They arise purely from Leela.
These acts transcend conventional
morality existing beyond good and evil.
Nze writes, "Gods delight in making fun.
Even where sacred actions are concerned,
it seems they cannot stop laughing."
This is no mockery, but an expression of
divine play even in the most serious or
sacred moments. The gods may laugh and
remain playful. We may find sacredness
in everyday human interactions. For each
person in his own way reflects the
divine. Chesterton writes, "And now a
great thing in the street seems any
human nod where move in strange
democracy the million masks of God.
Life is like a game and we shouldn't
take it too seriously. The first rule of
the social game is it is serious or this
game is not a game." Consequently,
society tends to resist any suggestion
that what we do might not be entirely
serious. Alan Watts states, "The
standpoint of the fool is that all
social institutions are games. He sees
the whole world as game playing. And
that's why when people take their games
seriously and put on stern and pious
expressions, the fool gets the giggles
because he knows it's all a game."
The art of the fool is paradoxical. He
reveals that life is a game of play,
masks, and delusions. Yet, he keeps the
show going. He unveils just enough not
to ruin the game. Conscious of playing
within the illusion, he still plays
along. Why this is remains a mystery.
This is the great cosmic joke. A game is
not merely a trivial pastime for it is
in essence life itself. Just like the
artist becomes wholly absorbed in the
art of creation or the actor loses
himself in the unfolding of a role, so
too do we become immersed in the drama
of existence. The play of the supreme
self is like a passing illusion, as if
God dreamt reality into being. And like
a great actor makes you forget it's all
a show, persuading you that it's real
and keeping you on the edge of your
seat. It is natural for people to take
life seriously at times. But when the
fool sees someone acting too serious,
thinking himself extremely important. He
can't help but laugh. He knows that the
more serious one is, the bigger the
surprise and the louder the laughter.
When he realizes it wasn't serious after
all. Then he shouts, "The joke's on
you." implying that you never even
realized you were the target of the joke
all along. Lovecraft writes, "I cannot
help seeing beyond the tinsel of humor
and recognizing the pitiful basis of
jest. The world is indeed comic, but the
joke is on mankind."
In one of his most enigmatic sayings,
Heracitus wrote, "Ion is a child at
play, playing a game with stones. The
kingdom belongs to a child." The term
ion originally meant visual force or
life breath later came to mean lifespan
and eventually evolved into a dynamic or
cosmic principle ion becoming a deity
associated with eternal and cyclical
time. Human life in its entirety is like
a child at play and that divine
authority ultimately belongs to this
child. This echoes the saying in the
book of Matthew. Truly I tell you,
unless you change and become like little
children, you will never enter the
kingdom of heaven. While playing a game
is unpredictable and ever changing, it
is still guided by certain rules,
strategies, and logic. Similarly,
although life may sometimes feel
chaotic, it unfolds according to an
underlying order, reflecting Heraclitus'
view of the union of opposites in
nature.
In tarot, which is also known as the
fool's journey, the fool is the first of
the 22 major kana cards and is assigned
the number zero. The journey to
self-nowledge begins not with wisdom,
but with folly. In the red book, Jung
states, "The soul demands your folly,
not your wisdom." The fool initiates us
into the great mystery of life.
Throughout this journey, he encounters
different archetypes that are
reflections of our inner world. By
recognizing the images that we project
onto outer reality as mirror reflections
of our own psyche, we come to know
ourselves. The fool walks happily,
carrying no heavy burden. He has only a
few belongings in his bindle, a simple
sack tied to a stick associated with a
vagabond, wanderer, or pilgrim. Earlier
cards depict the fool alternatively as a
beggar, madman, wild man of the woods or
cold jester. The fool marks the start of
a new beginning full of potential. The
sun is shining brightly. Symbolically,
they represents consciousness. Just as
the rooster signals the coming dawn, the
fool expresses a new awareness that is
still hidden in the darkness of the
unconscious. The fool also holds a white
rose symbolizing purity and innocence
qualities of the poor eternus or eternal
youth. The wind blows on his clothes
making him as light as a feather. He's
lost in his thoughts of all the
fantasies and wonderful adventures ahead
and has his head above the clouds. A dog
representing his instinct tries to warn
him that he's about to fall off a cliff
into the water. When the fool falls, he
does not die. Instead, he begins his
journey into the unknown, descending
into the depths of the unconscious. The
fall serves as a necessary compensation
for the fool's one-sidedness. He must
become earthier, more anchored in
reality. Falling is a common motif in
dreams, often expressing a compensation
for ego inflation, which causes one to
overestimate one's importance and power.
Pride comes before a fall. In an ancient
Greek fable, Thales of Myitus was said
to have been so absorbed in observing
the stars that he fell into a well. One
cannot truly comprehend the heavens
above without first understanding what
lies beneath one's feet. As above, so
below.
Earlier we said that the fool helps to
ground us in reality. But now he himself
must be grounded. This is the paradox.
The fool represents both the elements of
air and earth. We might say that the
professional fool who pretends to be
foolish but is in fact clever,
spontaneous, and quick embodies air.
Conversely, the natural fool, foolish by
nature, is more instinctual and rooted
in the earth. But we could just as
easily reverse this. The professional
fool tasked with bringing lofty people
down to earth takes on a practical
grounding role while the natural fool
drifts through life oblivious and
unbburdened, light as air and detached
from worldly concerns.
Paradox is the vital water of life our
modern world desperately needs. We will
go almost to any length to avoid its
painful tension. But in doing so, we
trap ourselves in meaningless
contradiction. While suffering with
meaning can be endured, meaningless
suffering is unbearable. Contradiction
is barren and destructive, yet paradox
is fertile and creative. It is a
powerful embracing of reality. Moving
from opposition which breeds conflict to
paradox which is sacred and unites
requires a leap in consciousness.
To find peace, one must recognize the
conflict of opposites as part of life's
natural rhythm. Life is a river that
simply flows. Like waves, we rise and
fall. The awakened mind becomes detached
like a non-judgmental observer
understanding that neither happiness nor
sadness will last. Like the turning of
the wheel of fortune, life moves in
cycles. At times you rise and at others
you fall. Suffering begins when we cling
to certainty, always seeking clear
answers and rejecting opposing views.
But when we stop seeing contradiction
and start recognizing paradox, something
within us begins to heal. When the
opposites are united, bliss arises. This
is the true transcendent experience.
Western traditions tend to emphasize
unity. All is one. While eastern
traditions incline towards emptiness,
both are valid. They express the same
transcendent truth seen from different
angles. The alchemists called it the
unus mundus, the one world. The Gnostics
the plleoma, the fullness of being. It
is the reality that unites all
opposites, the ultimate sacred marriage.
A little more than halfway through his
journey, the fool meets death shown as a
skeleton. What remains when we die and
our body decays. Death wears black
armor. Black, the absence of light,
evokes night, which in nature brings
darkness, danger, and fear of the
unknown. Likewise, death is perceived as
a passage into darkness, the end of
visible life. The card bears the number
13, long considered unlucky in Western
culture. Yet, death also rides a white
horse and carries a black banner adorned
with a white lotus. In alchemy, the
negretto or blackness leads to the elto
or whiteness. Mortification gives way to
purification. Darkness transforms into
light. In Irish mythology and Aoran
tales, a knight is often confronted by
an unknown warrior who demands he lay
his neck on the block. If the young man
has the courage to obey this fateful
command, the mysterious figure casts
down his ax and lifts his visor,
revealing himself as a savior of shining
countenance. If one can withstand the
trial of initiation, one is transformed
and reborn. Death is not an end but a
transition into another existence. The
death of the old self and birth of a new
one occur when we overcome a major trial
in life and acquire the treasure hard to
attain in the form of a higher level of
consciousness. Only that which can
destroy itself is truly alive. As the
saying goes, if you die before you die,
then when you die, you don't die. In the
presence of death, there are four
figures with different postures, each
reflecting a different response to death
within ourselves. Lying on the ground is
the fallen king, a common motif in
alchemy where the king is ritually
killed because he has grown old, sick,
or impotent. The kingdom, a symbol of
the self, cannot flourish under stagnant
rule. As the saying goes, "The king is
dead. Long live the king. The old must
die for new life to rise. In contrast,
the bishop stands before death with his
hands clasped in prayer, representing
faith, humility, and spiritual
acceptance. The young maiden, however,
collapses or faints and has her head
turned away. She symbolizes grief or
denial and is unable to look at death
directly. Meanwhile, the child stares
with awe and innocence, seemingly
unafraid. He represents the poor eternus
pointing towards vitality, renewal, and
growth.
There's much to learn from the image of
the fool dancing with death. It reminds
us to remember our mortality and not
take our persona too seriously, but
instead to seek our true self, to be
like the fool who redeems everything he
touches and thus becomes the precursor
to the savior. To recognize the wisdom
that comes from admitting our own folly.
To understand that what we most need is
hidden where we least want to look. To
live in the eternal now. And to see that
life is Leela, a mystery, a divine play,
a great cosmic joke. And yet to play
along and see the beauty in it. And
finally to embrace paradox over
contradiction, life and death, wisdom
and folly, play and seriousness. For it
is through holding the tension of these
opposites on the journey of
self-realization
that we become aligned with the self,
complete the great work, and attain
bliss.